# Summary and Conclusions {#sec:conclusion}

An efficient parameterization of droplet activation for a single aerosol model under a wide variety of different physico-chemical properties and thermodynamic conditions was developed via statistical emulation of a detailed parcel model using polynomial chaos expansion. The emulators predict the maximum supersaturation achieved by a parcel, which is then used to diagnose activated droplet number using Köhler theory in a similar framework to existing activation parameterizations. The 4th- and 5th-order chaos expansions derived from the detailed parcel model are more accurate on average than two commonly-used, physically-based parameterizations from the literature [@Abdul-Razzak2000; @MoralesBetancourt2014b]. Additionally, the chaos expansions are all at least 10 times faster to evaluate than the MBN scheme and only about twice as expensive as the ARG scheme. A simple algorithm was suggested for evaluating a chaos expansion which requires a minimal amount of data about the expansion (such as the basis polynomials and the coefficients of the expansion terms) to be saved; in this way, the chaos expansions offer a method for extending lookup tables to very high dimensionalities without suffering from exponentially-rising storage costs.

Based on the large set of aerosol properties and thermodynamic conditions we sampled in order to derive and evaluate the chaos expansions, we observed that our emulators particularly outperform the existing schemes in conditions where a light updraft and heavy aerosol pollution (with respect to number concentration) are present. Because the ultimate goal of an activation parameterization is to couple the aerosol physics and chemistry to the cloud microphysics of a global-scale model, this deficiency in the existing parameterizations could be particularly important. Few global models have aerosol-microphysics connections in their deep convection parameterizations, but many source potential cloud droplet formation based on a detailed aerosol activation calculation for their shallow convection and stratiform microphysics schemes. These schemes sometimes artificially restrict the lowest possible updraft speed available for estimating droplet activation, but as a consequence they ensure that weak updrafts make up a large portion of the activation conditions considered during a model run. In regions of the world with heavy anthropogenic aerosol pollution - such as southern and eastern Asia - this provides a recipe for systematically under-predicting droplet number and potentially impacting either a global model's simulated aerosol indirect effect on climate or the modeled aerosol-cloud interaction's sensitivity to changes in anthropogenic aerosol emissions.

Critically, the framework from which the chaos expansions reported here are derived is extendable to the case where a complex, multi-species/multi-modal aerosol population is tracked by a global model; in that case, the number of parameters describing the aerosol size distribution and chemical composition simply increases. Future work will derive chaos expansions emulating activation for a multi-modal aerosol distribution specific to a particular global aerosol-climate model. Additionally, physical processes not considred here can also be introduced into the chaos expansion framework. For instance, entrainment can be incorporated into the parcel model following @Seinfeld2006 and @Barahona2007. Subgrid-scale variability in updraft speeds due to the coarse resolution of global model grids and the distribution of these updrafts can be represented either by a characteristic value [@Morales2010] or by numerical integration over a distribution [@Lohmann1999]. In the latter case, many activation calculations must be performed, incurring a large computational cost. However, the entire integration over a spectrum of droplet speeds could be parameterized in the chaos expansion framework, greatly reducing the cost of this calculation and potentially improving the accuracy of diagnosed cloud droplet number.

As the complexity of global aerosol-climate models increases with respect to the number of aerosol modes and species tracked by the model, there is a pressing need to understand how biases in activation calculations across the high-dimensional parameter spaces defining the aerosol-climate model affect cloud properties and ultimately impact modeled climate. This work highlights a novel way to build efficient, accurate activation schemes for this purpose akin to customized lookup tables which cannot themselves extend to cover the necessary parameters. Employing such schemes should help improve simulated cloud microphysical properties and constrain modeled aerosol indirect effects on climate.

